src/posts/2021/2021-08-20-en.md, before:

---
path: "/en/2021/08/20"
type: "post"
date: 2021-08-20
lang: "en"
title: "w33 thoughts"
keywords: "types"
description: "A post after the long break"
author: "Farrukh Normuradov"
---

# w33 thoughts

## Open Source

After a long break, I build internal peace and energy started to fontain inside of me. I invested some time into my small npm [package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/gdpr-person-generator). The library dereministically generates name and date of birth. It can be handy to those who want to fill data with fake personal data.

I "rewrote" the package to make use of TypeScript. I learned how to setup linter. (Though I still do not get why a separate formatter is needed apart from a linter.) I also getup [continuous integration](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pharrukh/gdpr-person-generator/master/.github/workflows/base-pipeline.yml) and [continuous delivery](https://github.com/pharrukh/gdpr-person-generator/blob/master/.github/workflows/release-pipeline.yml). I used GitHub Actions and spend extra couple of hours because the documentation misses one line. 🤷‍♀️ 

In general this is not the first time and I think I enjoy the process and with every setup or iteration it is in general easier because more concepts are familiar and more common issues are expected. Concepts of actions/steps/stages/jobs and triggers are main elements of pipelines. Common issues are version missmatch between the node version and project packages or visibility of environment variables.

## Books

### Riscutia, V., (2020). _Programming with Types_ Shelter Island: Manning

My mentor, Stefan Reichel, is a type wizard. He was quite into type system and showed a number of tricks for TypeScript. Here is one example of how optionality can be better typed:

```typescript
type Maybe<T> = T | undefined
```
One of Reichel's recommendations was to have a look at "Programming with Types". Riscutia gives in-depth example of the Mars Climate Orbiter that illustrates how deadly could carelessness to types be. He shows how [`unique symbol`](https://stackoverflow.com/a/49452127/3407539) can overcome TypeScript [`structural subtyping`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structural_type_system). I found this charming.

I plan to invest a bit more time to complete the challenging exercises and see how can the author's examples live in different cases. My experiments can be found [here](https://github.com/pharrukh/programming-with-types).

Commit message:

chore: add a sentence about iterators

src/posts/2021/2021-08-20-en.md, after:

---
path: "/en/2021/08/20"
type: "post"
date: 2021-08-20
lang: "en"
title: "w33 thoughts"
keywords: "types"
description: "A post after the long break"
author: "Farrukh Normuradov"
---

# w33 thoughts

## Open Source

After a long break, I build internal peace and energy started to fontain inside of me. I invested some time into my small npm [package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/gdpr-person-generator). The library dereministically generates name and date of birth. It can be handy to those who want to fill data with fake personal data.

I "rewrote" the package to make use of TypeScript. I learned how to setup linter. (Though I still do not get why a separate formatter is needed apart from a linter.) I also getup [continuous integration](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/pharrukh/gdpr-person-generator/master/.github/workflows/base-pipeline.yml) and [continuous delivery](https://github.com/pharrukh/gdpr-person-generator/blob/master/.github/workflows/release-pipeline.yml). I used GitHub Actions and spend extra couple of hours because the documentation misses one line. 🤷‍♀️

In general this is not the first time and I think I enjoy the process and with every setup or iteration it is in general easier because more concepts are familiar and more common issues are expected. Concepts of actions/steps/stages/jobs and triggers are main elements of pipelines. Common issues are version missmatch between the node version and project packages or visibility of environment variables.

## Books

### Riscutia, V., (2020). _Programming with Types_ Shelter Island: Manning

My mentor, Stefan Reichel, is a type wizard. He was quite into type system and showed a number of tricks for TypeScript. Here is one example of how optionality can be better typed:

```typescript
type Maybe<T> = T | undefined
```

One of Reichel's recommendations was to have a look at "Programming with Types". Riscutia gives in-depth example of the Mars Climate Orbiter that illustrates how deadly could carelessness to types be. He shows how [`unique symbol`](https://stackoverflow.com/a/49452127/3407539) can overcome TypeScript [`structural subtyping`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structural_type_system). I found this charming.

I plan to invest a bit more time to complete the challenging exercises and see how can the author's examples live in different cases. My experiments can be found [here](https://github.com/pharrukh/programming-with-types). I particularly like [`iterators`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iterator_pattern) and want to learn more about this nice language construct/pattern.
